Leaf infections occur as tiny, sunken reddish-brown flecks with yellow halos. Lesions on stems and petioles are round to elliptical, slightly raised, and reddish-brown to black in color. Flecking of the sepals and blighting of the flower buds can also occur. Infected grapes soften and become completely covered with concentric rings of fruiting bodies known as acervuli. Light colored fruit often turn brown, while dark colored fruit appear roughened and sparkly when acervuli develop (Figure 8-3). Infected fruit may abscise, or may dry into mummies and stay firmly attached. Bitter rot is often confused with black rot, but the black rot pathogen primarily infects immature or green fruit before veraison while the bitter rot fungus infects fruit at maturity.

The fungal pathogen that causes bitter rot, *Greeneria uvicola* (syn. *Melanconium fuligineum*), overwinters on plant debris, canes, and mummified fruit. In the spring, spores (conidia) from acervuli are carried by rain to all green parts of the vine, including the pedicels. The pathogen invades the pedicels and becomes latent, or inactive, until fruit mature. Fruit become increasingly susceptible to infection from bloom to veraison. In the weeks leading up to harvest, the pathogen grows from the pedicels into the ripening fruit, causing them to rot and eventually become completely covered with concentric rings of fruiting bodies. Secondary infections can occur when conidia from infected grapes are rain splashed to fruit that has been mechanically wounded by birds, insects, or hail, or has cracked following heavy rains.

## Management Options

**Cultural** - Good weed control and canopy management practices, including pruning, leaf removal, and shoot positioning, promote air circulation and light penetration, which improve drying of leaves and clusters and will result in a less favorable environment for bitter rot development. It is essential to prune out dead spurs and cordons and other infected plant material during the dormant season to reduce the inoculum carried over to the next season. Bunch grapes vary in susceptibility from resistant to highly susceptible.

**Chemical** - Successful management of bitter rot involves protecting fruit with fungicides during favorable infection periods of warm wet weather from bloom to harvest. The spray program devised to control black rot will help to manage early season bitter rot activity, but to prevent fruit infections and subsequent rot, late season and preharvest fungicides should be applied.

## Black Rot

Black rot is the most common early-season fruit rot disease of bunch grapes in North Carolina. Most varieties of vinifera, French/American hybrids and American bunch grapes are susceptible. Crop loss due to black rot can range from 5 to 80 percent, depending on weather conditions, level of inoculum, and susceptibility of the variety.

Black rot disease affects leaves, shoots, tendrils, and fruit of grapevines. Leaf spots are characteristically tan, circular lesions with small black fruiting structures (pycnidia) scattered within them (Figure 8-4). Infections on young shoots, tendrils, and petioles first appear as small dark lesions that later develop into elongated, often sunken lesions. Elongated black cankers may develop on shoots, and can eventually girdle them, causing a shoot blight. Lesions on fruit are initially small and scabby but as they expand they