vineyards. Red fescue is not competitive, undesirable for voles, and needs minimal mowing. However, red fescue seed is expensive and can be difficult to establish. Tall fescue seed is readily available and is considerably less expensive than red fescue. Tall fescue can be established easily. If the property was previously used for grazing, it is likely planted in tall fescue. On the other hand, tall fescue is very competitive for water and nutrients and needs mowing more often than red fescue.

Sod can be managed with sublethal rates of glyphosate to minimize the need for mowing. This practice is commonly referred to as "chemical mowing". Chemical mowing can stop growth for 90 to 120 days, therefore eliminating the need for mowing during that time. Specific directions for chemical mowing can be found on glyphosate labels. Grass yellows after chemical mowing with glyphosate.

## Herbicide Issues

A number of effective herbicides are registered for use in grape vineyards. Herbicides largely fall into two categories, preemergence (PRE) and postemergence (POST). Preemergence herbicides provide weed control prior to weeds emerging from the soil. Postemergence herbicides control weeds that are emerged from the soil and actively growing. A PRE herbicide is often tank mixed with a POST herbicide in order to control emerged weeds with one application. PRE herbicides have to be activated by rainfall or overhead irrigation in order to work properly. Poor herbicide activation will result in less than desirable herbicide performance. The interval between application and the need for activation varies from one herbicide to another. Some herbicides need activation by rainfall or irrigation within a day while others may wait for 2 or 3 weeks before significant losses in effectiveness occurs. However, the sooner activation occurs from rainfall or irrigation after herbicide application the better.

POST herbicides can be divided into the two categories referred to as contact and systemic. Contact herbicides kill or destroy the area of a plant it contacts. Systemic herbicides move through the leaf surfaces of weeds, into the weed's vascular system where it is able to move through the plant. Herbicides that have POST contact properties include paraquat, and glufosinate (Rely). Examples of herbicides that are systemic include glyphosate, sethoxydim (Poast), and clethodim (Select or Arrow). In order for most POST herbicides to perform properly spray additives may be required. The two most commonly used spray additives are a non-ionic surfactant or a crop oil concentrate. A non-ionic surfactant acts as a spreader to maximize coverage and may aid in penetration. Crop oil concentrates are approximately 15 percent surfactant emulsifier and 85 percent petroleum-based oil. Crop oil concentrates increase herbicide penetration through weed leaf surfaces. POST herbicide labels have specific directions on their label pertaining to spray additives. Always follow label directions.

The effectiveness of POST herbicides can be affected by weed size, growth stage, and soil moisture. In general, small weeds are more easily controlled than large weeds while perennial weeds are more sensitive to glyphosate at specific stages of growth. Ideally, POST herbicides should be applied to non-stressed, actively growing weeds. Weeds stressed from drought can be more difficult to control than non-stressed weeds. However, application timing for POST herbicides should be based primarily on weed size or growth stage when it is most susceptible to the herbicide being applied.

## Herbicides – Effective and Economical

Establishment and First Year. Weed control during the initial year of planting and subsequent developmental years is extremely important. The

125