NOT apply to weeds stressed from drought. DO NOT apply within one year of harvest. Clethodim is for non-bearing grapes only. Apply in spray volumes of 15 to 20 gal per acre for best results.

Fluazifop (Fusilade DX) at 0.25 to 0.375 lb ai/acre (16 to 24 oz/acre) provides excellent POST control of annual and perennial grasses. Fusilade has no soil activity or activity on broadleaf weeds or sedges. For optimum results add 1 qt of a crop oil concentrate or 8 oz of nonionic surfactant for every 25 gal of spray mix. Spray solution contact with grape leaves during hot, humid conditions can cause foliar burn or injury. Sequential applications will be necessary for controlling perennial grass weeds like bermudagrass or johnsongrass. DO NOT apply to weeds stressed from drought. DO NOT apply within one year of harvest.

Glufosinate (Rely 1L) apply at 0.75 to 1.25 lb ai/acre (3 to 5 qt/acre) for non-selective POST weed control. Apply as a directed spray to the base of plants. DO NOT allow herbicide to contact desirable foliage or green bark or apply within 14 days of harvest. Glufosinate can be used for sucker control. Apply at 4 qt/acre when sucker length does not exceed 12 inches. Two applications, 4 weeks apart are recommended—see label for directions. Glufosinate can be tank mixed with PRE herbicides for residual control.

Glyphosate (Various formulations of 5.5L or 4L) applied at 0.75 to 1 lb ai/acre (16 to 22 oz/acre of 5.5L formulations or 0.75 to 1 qt/acre of 4L formulations) will provide non-selective POST weed control. The rates listed above controls most weeds. Some species (woody perennial, etc.) require higher rates for control; refer to label for details. Grapes exhibit excellent tolerance to glyphosate applied in winter, spring and early summer. However, grapes become sensitive to glyphosate applied after June through late fall until grapes become dormant. Applications made in late summer and fall may be injurious. DO NOT spray green bark or foliage.

DO NOT apply on first-year plantings. Glyphosate may be used as a spot treatment for controlling perennial weeds like brambles, mugwort, Virginia creeper, and poison ivy. Some glyphosate formulations may require the addition of a surfactant. See label for details. Glyphosate is most effective when applied in spray volumes of 15 to 30 gal per acre. Glyphosate can be tank mixed with PRE herbicides for residual weed control.

Paraquat (Firestorm 3.0L, Gramoxone Inteon 2.0L) applied at 0.66 to 1 lb ai/acre (1.75 to 2.7 pt/acre for 3.0L formulation, 2 to 4 pt/acre for 2.0L formulation) provides POST control of annual weeds and suppresses perennial weeds. Apply when grass and broadleaf weeds are 1 to 4 in high and actively growing for best results. Green bark of grapes must be shielded from contact with spray solution. The addition of a nonionic surfactant at 0.25% v/v (1 qt per 100 gal of spray solution) is necessary. Apply in no less than 20 gal of spray solution per acre. Paraquat can be used to suppress or control suckers, however application must be when sucker length does not exceed 8 in. Paraquat may be tank mixed with PRE herbicides for residual weed control.

Sethoxydim (Poast) applied at 0.28 to 0.47 lb ai/acre (1.5 to 2.5 pt/acre) provides excellent control of annual and some perennial grasses. Sethoxydim has no soil activity or activity on broadleaf weeds or sedges. The addition of crop oil concentrate at 1 qt/acre is recommended. Spray solution contact with grape leaves during hot, humid conditions can cause foliar burn or injury. Sequential applications will be necessary for controlling perennial grass weeds like bermudagrass or johnsongrass. DO NOT apply to weeds stressed from drought. DO NOT apply within 50 days of harvest.

Tillage/Herbicide Program

While specialty tillage equipment can be used in conjunction with herbicides to provide excellent