# Botrytis Bunch Rot, Gray Mold

Botrytis bunch rot is the most important bunch rot disease of grapes worldwide, and can cause serious losses in the vineyard and in transit or storage. Botrytis infection is favored by cool weather and free moisture on the surface of fruit. Bunch rot is most severe on varieties with thin skins or tight fruit clusters, under heavy canopies, and in areas of high humidity.

Leaf infection by the bunch rot pathogen, *B. cinerea*, occurs under cool, moist conditions in spring prior to bloom, and appears as a dull green spot that turns into a reddish-brown necrotic lesion. Young shoots and blossoms may also become infected, resulting in significant yield losses. Small brown patches may appear on pedicels or rachises that later turn black, causing portions of the cluster to shrivel and drop. The fungus infects and rots ripening berries, causing the fruit of white varieties to become brown and purple varieties to become reddish. The most common symptom of the disease appears when fluffy, gray-brown growth containing spores becomes visible, eventually spreading throughout the entire cluster (Fig 8-6).

The causal fungus, *B. cinerea*, overwinters on canes, bark, dormant buds, and debris on the vineyard floor as dormant mycelium, or as hard, resting structures (sclerotia) in berry mummies or on canes, which are resistant to adverse weather conditions. Conidia produced in the spring are rain-splashed and windblown to newly emerging leaves. Infection may occur at temperatures as high as 86°F, but the optimum temperature for infection is between 59 and 68°F. Tissue that is dead or has been injured by hail, wind, birds, or insects is usually colonized before healthy tissue. Early-season powdery mildew infected fruit are also more susceptible to infection. Since spore production and infection are favored by wetness and high humidity, fruit infection in North Carolina may occur throughout the season from bloom to closing, and after veraison when sugar concentrations increase in fruit. As harvest approaches, spores from infected fruit may spread to other fruit in the cluster as well as to other clusters.

# Management Options

**Cultural** - Good botrytis control starts with good sanitation practices. Before spring arrives, it is extremely important to remove all of last year's fruit from the trellis, as well as canes, bark, and debris from the vineyard floor. Because *B. cinerea* thrives under moist conditions, good canopy management practices, including shoot thinning, leaf removal, pruning, cluster thinning, and shoot positioning, are essential for reducing humidity and increasing air circulation. Varieties of bunch grapes vary in their susceptibility (Table 8-2). The disease tends to be more severe on varieties and clones with tight clusters.

**Chemical** - Fungicide applications are most critical in the veraison and preharvest sprays, and if the season is wet, sprays may be necessary at bloom and closing as well. Additionally, it is important to prevent early season powdery mildew infections since infected fruit are more susceptible to infection by *B. cinerea*. If conditions become wet at harvest, picking early can reduce the amount of fruit lost to botrytis bunch rot.