flumioxazin (Chateau). This application would be applied in late March in western North Carolina. Another application of paraquat or glufosinate with flumioxazin should be applied when control from the initial application fails and emerging weeds are 2 to 4 inches tall. The second application is generally applied in early to mid June in western North Carolina. This program can only be implemented with flumioxazin since other products' labels (like simazine and diuron) do not allow for sequential applications within the same year. Regardless of the PRE herbicide program, perennial weeds like bermudagrass, johnsongrass, brambles, etc., will be troublesome.

## Preemergence Herbicides for Newly Planted and Established Vineyards

Dichlobenil (Casoron 4G) at 4 to 6 lb ai/acre (100 to 150 lb/acre) controls many annual and perennial weeds. Apply in January and February for best results. Dichlobenil may be applied in newly planted grapes once soil has settled and plants have recovered from transplanting.

Flumioxazin (Chateau 51 WDG) at 0.19 to 0.38 lb ai/acre (6 to 12 oz/acre) controls annual broadleaf and grass weeds. Sequential applications are most effective. An initial application in March followed by a second application when control from the initial one deteriorates will provide residual control of annual weeds through harvest. Grapes established less than 2 years must be shielded from contact with the herbicide and trellised 3 ft above the soil surface. DO NOT apply within 60 days of harvest and allow a minimum of 30 days between sequential applications. Hooded or shielded application equipment must be used in established vineyards to prevent contact of spray solution with foliage or fruit. Tank mix with glyphosate, paraquat, or glufosinate for postemergence weed control. Applications of flumioxazin after bud break should not be applied with glyphosate.

Isoxaben (Gallery 75 DF) at 0.5 to 1 lb ai/acre (0.66 to 1.33 lb/acre) controls broadleaf weeds including pigweed, lambsquarters, horseweed, ragweed, aster, smartweed, and chickweed. Apply once soil has settled after transplanting. Tank mix with oryzalin, paraquat, glyphosate, or glufosinate.

Napropamide (Devrinol 50 DF) 4 lb ai/acre controls most annual grasses and small seeded broadleaf weeds. Apply prior to weed emergence. Activation from rainfall or overhead irrigation is needed within 24 hours of application for optimum results to prevent napropamide breakdown by sunlight. DO NOT apply within 35 days of harvest. Apply once soil has settled around vines after transplanting.

Oryzalin (Surflan 4 AS, FarmSaver 4 AS) applied at 2 to 4 lb ai/acre (2 to 4 qt/acre) controls most annual grasses and annual sedge. It also controls small seeded broadleaf weeds like chickweed, purslane, carpetweed, lambsquarters, and pigweed. Rate is soil-texture dependent. Oryzalin may be used in newly planted vineyards once soil has settled around plants after transplanting. Oryzalin can be tank mixed with oxyfluorfen, simazine, glyphosate, paraquat, or glufosinate.

Oxyfluorfen (Goal 2 XL, Galligan 2EC, OxiFlo 2EC or GoalTender) 0.5 to 2 lb ai/acre (2 to 8 pt/acre for all 2EC formulations, 1 to 4 pts/acre for GoalTender). Oxyfluorfen provides both PRE and POST broadleaf weed control. It should only be applied prior to vine bud swell while the crop is dormant. DO NOT apply to grapes established less than 3 years unless vines are on a trellis wire, 3 ft above the soil surface. Oxyfluorfen may be tank-mixed with pronamide, nampropamide, simazine, oryzalin, paraquat, glyphosate, or glufosinate.

Pendimethalin (Prowl 3.3 EC or Prowl H2O) at 2 to 4 lb ai/acre (2.4 to 4.8 qt/acre of Prowl 3.3 EC or 2 to 4 qt/acre of Prowl H₂O) controls annual grasses and small seeded broadleaf weeds including chickweed, pigweed,