row is more difficult in North Carolina than other regions of the country. Herbicides offer the most economical means for maintaining a weed-free strip. However, growers interested in organic production, or those preferring to avoid herbicides, other options like tillage, and organic and inorganic mulches are possibilities. All of these options are discussed later in this chapter.

## Why a Weed-Free Strip?

**Competition** Maintaining a weed-free strip in the vine row is especially important in the first and second years of vineyard establishment. Weeds compete with grape vines for water and nutrients, reducing vine growth and yield. Competition for water causes the greatest stress on vines. Although irrigation is common in many vineyards, its efficiency is greatly reduced with the presence of weeds. Research conducted in North Carolina has shown that newly planted vineyards should be maintained weed-free 12 weeks after planting. Herbicide options in newly planted vineyards are relatively limited after spring transplanting. By using grow tubes on newly planted vines, you will have the option of using some very effective herbicides in the first summer season for weed control. Grow tubes are plastic sleeves that create a greenhouse-like environment for the vines to grow in, and also serve to protect new vines from herbicide drift. The number of herbicide options improves for vines in their second growing season, and weed control in the third year and subsequent seasons is achieved with a wide range of preemergence herbicides. In addition, established vineyards shade more of the vineyard floor, minimizing weed emergence and growth.

**Radiant Heating – Frost/Freeze Benefit** It is well-documented that ground cover management techniques can impact the vineyard microclimate directly impacting vineyard temperature. Research has shown that bare, firm, moist soil has the greatest capacity to absorb heat from sunlight. Heat is reradiated, over a longer time period at night, altering the microclimate by increasing air temperatures in the vineyard and providing additional protection from frost events. In addition, the weed-free surface in the vine row, and closely mown vegetation in the row middle facilitates air drainage, providing additional frost protection.

**IPM Benefit** Controlling weeds is part of integrated pest management in the vineyard. Weeds provide cover that creates an ideal habitat for voles. Part of vole management includes maintaining a weed-free strip year-round. In addition, weeds under vines provide egg laying sites for grape root borer, and the weeds interfere with soil-applied insecticides used to control grape root borer.

## Sod Middle (Species Selection and Management)

As previously discussed, the perennial sod middles are critical for preventing erosion and providing a firm ground cover that allows equipment to move through the vineyard even during periods of wet weather. Ideally, ground cover should be noncompetitive, need minimum mowing, and should be durable. A preferred species is red fescue, but tall fescue has become the most common species used in North Carolina