investment for a vineyard is considerable, and vineyards become fully productive only after several years. In order to maximize the return as soon as possible, optimum vine growth during in the formative years of a vineyard is essential.

In many cases, vineyards are planted into an established, perennial sod. After grape rows have been marked off, and prior to planting, glyphosate can be used to kill vegetation. Usually glyphosate applied 4 weeks prior to planting will control cool-season grasses and perennial weeds common to grape production areas. In order to control most warm-season perennial grasses, apply glyphosate. Prior to planting, sub-soiling or other tillage operations can then be performed. At planting, the use of grow tubes are recommended to protect young vines from herbicide injury. Some herbicide labels require shielding of young vines. Once soil has settled around grape roots after planting, a PRE herbicide should be applied. Flumioxazin (Chateau - shielded vines), oryzalin (Surflan), pendimethalin (Prowl), dichlobenil (Casoron), oxyfluorfen (Goal - if trellis system is used), and napropamide (Devrinol) can be applied to newly planted grapes. POST herbicides will need to be applied to control escaped weeds throughout the summer. However, young grape vines must be shielded from paraquat or injury will occur. Grow tubes offer excellent herbicide protection along with increased growth during the first year. Perennial grasses can be very competitive with grapes. Choose a herbicide like sethoxydim (Poast), fluazifop (Fusilade), and clethodim (Select), which are registered for use in newly established vineyards. They are safe, effective options for POST grass control.

Established Vineyards (2 years or the year after transplanting). In established vineyards, growers have a broader range of herbicide options. There are four programs growers can consider. They include a spring PRE program, which is a traditional approach; the delayed PRE option; the fall/spring split option; and the spring/summer split option.

Spring PRE Program. Traditionally, a vineyard herbicide program has consisted of a spring PRE herbicide applied with a non-selective POST herbicide like glyphosate or paraquat followed by POST applications of paraquat or glufosinate (Rely) as needed.  
Delayed PRE Program requires a spring glyphosate application. The spring application should be made prior to bud break. Mid to late March is a good application time. Later, when