mon, a superior oil spray should be applied at the rate of 2.0 gallons of oil per hundred gallons of water per acre. Apply the oil about the time of bud break. Sprays applied much earlier will have less effect on mite eggs. Superior oil may be applied after green tissue is exposed; however, the oil should not be mixed with other pesticides and should not be applied if a frost is expected within 48 hours. Oil acts by suffocating the eggs and is most effective if applied just before mite eggs hatch. Oil sprays will delay or prevent mites from reaching economically damaging levels. If population development is sufficiently delayed, natural enemies may be able to suppress the buildup.

When miticides are needed, apply well-timed sprays. Apply sprays only to economically important populations. An action threshold for use on grapes has been provisionally set at 5 mites per leaf (10 mites per leaf on labrusca types). Such recommended treatment levels are approximations because of variability among varieties, crop loads, plant stress, weather, and other environmental interactions. When mites exceed these levels, monitor populations closely to determine foliar injury. Heavy bronzing of foliage must be prevented, but minor bronzing is tolerable. In fact, if minor visible injury is tolerated, the likelihood of eventual biological control increases. Most miticides currently available work best on motile (nonegg) stages. Applying such a spray kills the active mites present, but many eggs will survive and hatch. This surviving generation may require a second miticide application 7 to 10 days after the first spray.

Miticides should be used cautiously. Most are relatively expensive, and mites have a tremendous potential to develop resistance to miticides, making control measures ineffective. Mites are secondary pests, rising to economic status after elimination of their natural enemies by sprays for key pests such as Japanese beetle and grape berry moth.

# Wildlife

## Birds

Many species of birds are fond of ripe grapes and will quickly cause appreciable crop loss if not controlled. Birds are daytime feeders and can be identified if you happen to be in the vineyard when they are present. Otherwise, the clues to bird feeding are peck marks in individual berries, remnants of berry skins retained on the rachis (cluster stem), and selective feeding on individual berries of the cluster, leaving the rachis intact. Birds tend to consume the darkest pigmented berries first, leaving the greener, unripe berries for a later day. Feathers in the vine are an obvious clue. Vines under or close to roosting areas such as a treeline or overhead power lines are the most vulnerable. Dark-fruited, small-berried winegrape varieties are particularly susceptible.

Options to control bird feeding are diverse; few are entirely effective. They include recorded distress calls played on audio equipment in the vineyard; electrical wires mounted in the vineyard to shock birds attempting to land; various reflective materials intended to frighten; gas cannons with loud, frightening reports; various balloons and kites suspended above the vineyard intended to simulate bird predators; shooting; and enclosing the vines in netting to exclude birds. All of these devices have limitations. Most birds will eventually overcome their aversion to the various scare tactics. Bird netting, although laborious to apply and remove as well as expensive, is the choice where total, environmentally benign control is desired.

## Deer

The white-tailed deer is remarkably adaptable and can be found in rural as well as suburban settings. Deer depredation may be identified by sighting the deer in the vineyard or by their pattern of feeding.