# Downy Mildew

Downy mildew affects most varieties of grapes in North Carolina. It is most important early in the spring and as temperatures cool in the late summer and fall.

The disease is characterized by yellowish-green lesions (oil spots) that form on the upper surfaces of leaves and turn reddish-brown, necrotic, or mottled, as they expand. A cottony mass of fungal mycelium develops on the underside of leaves (Figure 8-7) and gives the lesions a downy white appearance that is also characteristic of the disease. All green parts of the vine that have mature, functioning stomata, including fruit, leaves, and young shoots, can become infected and covered with a white, downy, sporulating mass of mycelium. Infections of young berries can be mistaken for powdery mildew. When cluster infections occur late in the season, grapes do not soften and appear mottled and light green to red in color. Severely infected leaves often fall prematurely.

The fungus that causes the disease, *Plasmopara viticola*, overwinters as oospores in leaf debris on the vineyard floor and as mycelium in buds and leaves. At about 10-inches shoot growth, the fungus becomes active during rainy periods, producing zoospores that splash to the undersides of leaves, encyst, and form germ tubes that invade the stomata when temperatures reach 52°F. Seven to 10 days after infection, yellowish-green lesions form on the upper leaf surfaces. During the evening, when humidity is greater than 95 percent, sporulating structures produce sporangia that are disseminated by wind and rain to susceptible tissue. The sporangia liberate zoospores that can initiate secondary infections. Epidemics develop through secondary spread of the fungus, which is most severe during periods when warm humid nights are followed by rain the next day.

# Management Options

**Cultural** - Ensure that soils are well drained, and use good canopy management practices to open the vine canopy to air and light to reduce the amount of trapped moisture and shorten the duration of wetting periods. Fallen leaves and vine debris that harbor overwintering inoculum should be shredded with a flail mower and then disked into the soil or removed from the vineyard. Most bunch grape varieties are highly susceptible to downy mildew (Table 8-2).

**Chemical** - Primary infections can occur from 2 to 3 weeks before bloom until fruit set, and fungicides are most critical during this time, particularly in problem vineyards. Fungicides should be applied either before infection conditions occur or within 5 days after a potential infection event (eradicant fungicides). Use the 10:10:24 rule of thumb to monitor for conditions that favor primary infection. According to the rule, favorable conditions for infection occur after 10 mm (approximately ¼-inch) of rain have fallen while temperatures are 10°C (50°F) or more over a 24-hour period. In order for infection to occur during the 10:10:24 event, the soil must have been wet for 16 hours, followed by rain, and then 2 to 3 hours of leaf wetting. Postharvest applications of fungicides are important for protecting foliage and preventing premature defoliation.